This file was downloaded from HathiTrust Digital Library.
Find more books at https://www.hathitrust.org.

Title:	   Constitution of the United Daughters of the Confederacy.
Author:    United Daughters of the Confederacy.
Publisher: [Atlanta, Ga.? : s.n., 1895?].

Copyright:
Public Domain
http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd

We have determined this work to be in the public domain, meaning that it is
not subject to copyright. Users are free to copy, use, and redistribute the
work in part or in whole. It is possible that current copyright holders,
heirs or the estate of the authors of individual portions of the work, such
as illustrations or photographs, assert copyrights over these portions.
Depending on the nature of subsequent use that is made, additional rights
may need to be obtained independently of anything we can address.
Find this book online: https://hdl.handle.net/2027/nc01.ark:/13960/t6155vs4z

This file has been created from the computer-extracted text of scanned page
images. Computer-extracted text may have errors, such as misspellings,
unusual characters, odd spacing and line breaks.

Original from: University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Digitized by:  Internet Archive

Generated on 2021-02-03 00:57 GMT

 
 CONSTITUTION OF THE United Daughters of the Confederacy 
 
 
 Article I. 
 NAME. 
 
 Section I. The name or title of the Association 
 shall be The United Daughters of the Confederacy. 
 
 Sec. II. Each State Organization shall be known 
 as a Division, and designated by the name of the 
 State in which it is located, and each local organization in that State, as a Chapter of the said Divis- 
 ion, to be numbered consecutively, and any name selected by such Chapter. 
 
 Article II. 
 
 OBJECTS. 
 
 The objects of this Association are educational, 
 memorial, literary, social and benevolent; to collect 
 and preserve the material for a truthful history of 
 the war between the Confederate States and the 
 United States of America; to honor the memory of 
 those who served and those who fell in the ser- 
 vice of the Corlfederate States, and to record the 
 part taken by Southern women, as well, in t&e-untir- 
 ing- effort after the war in the reconstruction of the 
 South, as in patient endurance of hardship and 
 patriotic devotion during- the strug-g-le; to cherish 
 the ties of friendship among- the members of the 
 Society, and to fulfill the duties of sacred charity to 
 the survivors of the war and those dependent upon 
 them. 
 
 Article III. 
 ORGANIZATION OF CHAPTERS. 
 
 Section I. Those women entitled to member- 
 ship are the widows, wives, mothers, sisters, nieces 
 and lineal descendants of such men as served honor- 
 ably in the Confederate Army, Navy and Civil Ser- 
 vice, or of those persons who loyally g-ave material 
 aid to the cause. Also, women and their lineal de- 
 scendants, wherever living-, who can g-ive proof of 
 personal service and loyal aid to the Southern cause 
 during- the war. 
 
 Sec. II. Each State Division shall furnish blank 
 applications for membership to be used throughout 
 that Division. These blanks may. differ in form, 
 but must not conflict with the qualifications of 
 membership as set forth in this Constitution. The 
 mode of electing- and admitting- members may also 
 vary with each Division, provided, ag-ain, the quali- 
 fications for membership be not inconsistent with 
 this Constitution. 
 
 Sec. III. Seven or more women in any State in 
 which no Division exists, may organize a Chapter 
 and be chartered on application to the United 
 Daug-hters of the Confederacy, and all Chapters sub- 
 sequently formed in that State shall apply throug-h 
 the first Chapter to the United Daug-hters of Con- 
 federacy for their Charters. A fee of three dollars 
 shall be paid to the United Daug-hters of the Con- 
 federacy for each Charter. Each Chapter shall re- 
 port annually to the United Daug-hters of the Con- 
 federacy, and shall on the first day of each succeed- 
 ing February pay into the Treasury of the United 
 Daughters of the Confederacy the sum of ten cents 
 for each and every member who may at such date 
 be in good standing- on the roll of such Chapter. 
 Provided, however, that nothing in this Constitu- 
 tion contained shall be construed as preventing any 
 Division or Chapter from becoming legally incor- 
 porated under the laws of the State in which it is 
 located, should it desire to do so. 
 
Sec. IV. The United Daughters of the Confed- 
 eracy suggest that the annual meeting of all Chapt- 
 ers be held on Gen. Lee's birthday, January 19th, 
 or if that day falls on Sunday, then on the day 
 following. 
 
 Article IV. 
 ORGANIZATION OF STATE DIVISIONS. 
 
 Section I. When three or more Chapters shall 
 be organized in any state, it shall be the duty of 
 the first or Charter Chapter to call a Convention for 
 the purpose of organizing a State Division. Such 
 Convention shall be held at a time and place to be 
 designated by the Charter Chapter, at which Con- 
 vention each Chapter shall be entitled to one vote 
 for every twenty-five members or fraction thereof if 
 such fraction be not less than seven. 
 
 Sec. II. &ach State Division shall be organized 
 by the adoption of a Constitution and By-laws, 
 none of which shall be inconsistent with any of the 
 provisions of this Constitution, and by the election 
 of a president and other proper officers. Any one 
 or more representatives from any Chapter shall be 
 authorized to cast the full vote to which such Chap- 
 ter may be entitled. In case a Chapter is unable to 
 send a delegate its vote may be cast by proxy. 
 
 Sec. III. From and after the organization of 
 such State Division, all Chapters in such State shall 
 be organized upon proper application for their Char- 
 ters to the United Daughters of the Confederacy, 
 through the Division. 
 
 Article V. 
 CONVENTIONS OF U. D. C. 
 
 Section I. Conventions of United Daughters of 
 the Confederacy shall be held annually on the 
 second Wednesday of November, at* such place as 
 designated by the preceding* Convention. 
 
 Sec. II. Each Chapter shall be entitled in all 
 Conventions of the United Daughters of the Con- 
 federacy to one vote for every twenty-five members 
 or fraction thereof not less than seven, provided 
 that when a Chapter has less than twenty-five mem- 
 bers it shall be entitled to one vote. ~Any one or 
 more representatives from any such Chapter shall 
 be authorized to cast the full vote to which such 
 Chapter may be entitled* Any Chapter not able to 
 send a delegate may send the vote by proxy. 
 
 Article VI. 
 OFFICERS. 
 
 The officers of the United Daughters of the Con- 
 federacy shall be a President who shall preside at 
 all meetings. 
 
 A Vice President, who shall preside in the absence 
 of the President. 
 
 A Recording Secretary. 
 
 A Corresponding Secretary. 
 
 A Treasurer. 
 
 All these shall be elected to serve for one year, or 
 until their successors shall be elected and qualified. 
 
 In case of a tie, the President has power to cast 
 the deciding vote. 
 
 Article VII. 
 FINANCE. 
 
 A Committee on Finance shall be composed of 
 five members, to whom shall be referred all matters 
 of receipts and expenditures. 
 
 Article VIII. 
 CERTIFICATES OF MEMBERSHIP. 
 
 Certificates of membership shall be furnished by 
 each Chapter to all members in good standing. 
 Such certificates shall be supplied by the United 
 Daughters of the Confederacy with their seal at- 
 tached. These Certificates must be signed by the 
 President of the United Daughters of the Confeder- 
 acy, the President of the State Division and the 
 President and Secretary of the local Chapter. 
 
 Article IX. 
 BADGES— INSIGNIA— SEALS. 
 
 Section I. The badge to be worn by the Daugh- 
 ters of the Confederacy shall consist of a represen- 
 tation of the Confederate flag (stars and bars) in 
 white, blue and scarlet enamel, surrounded by a 
 laurel wreath with the monogram, D. C. under the 
 flag, and dates '61- , 65 on loops of bow tieing wreath. 
 Divisions and Chapters may use in addition a badge 
 of their own. 
 
 Sec. II. The seal of the United Daughters of the 
 Confederacy shall be a reproduction of the great 
 seal of the Confederate States of America, with the 
 addition of the inscription, Daughters of the Con- 
 federacy, on the outer rim 
 
 Sec. III. The seals for all State Divisions shall 
 be of the same design with the addition of the name 
 of the Division. 
 
 Sec. IV. All official documents emanating from 
 the United Daughters of the Confederacy shall bear 
 the impress of its great seal. 
 
 Sec. V. The use of the name, seal and badge of 
 the United Daughters of the Confederacy for busi- 
 ness purposes other than the business of this Asso- 
 ciation is expressly prohibited. 
 
 Article X. 
 
 AMENDMENTS. 
 
 This Constitution may be amended by a two 
 thirds vote at any Convention of the United Daugh- 
 ters of the Confederacy, provided notice of such in- 
 tention to amend be filed with the Secretary at 
 least thirty days before the day fixed for the Con- 
 vention. Upon the filing of such notice the Sec- 
 retary shall forthwith extend the same to each of 
 the officers of the United Daughters of the Confed- 
 eracy, and to the representative of each Chapter in 
 direct connection with the United Daughters of the 
 Confederacy. 
 
 We, the Committee appointed March 30, 1895, to 
 revise the Constitution of the National Association 
 of the Daughters of the Confederacy, and reap- 
 pointed November 8, 1895, and empowered to put it 
 with its amendments into proper shape for printing", 
 hereby certify this paper to be in every clause a 
 true copy of that passed on by the Convention of 
 November 8, 1895, with the exception of a few 
 grammatical and clerical corrections made neces- 
 sary by the amendments. 
 
 Signed, Mrs. Jno. P. Hickman, 
 Mrs. Wm. M. Parsley, 
 Louisa McC. Smythe. 
 Atlanta, November 9, 1895. 
